Internet-Draft                                                 T. Darley
Intended status: Informational                          Proper Tools SRL
Expires: 2027-04-01                                        1 April 2026


                   Crowsong Archivist Header Format
          A Self-Describing Plain-Text Corpus Wrapping Convention

                  draft-darley-crowsong-archivist-00


Abstract

   This document specifies the Crowsong Archivist Header Format (CAHF),
   a plain-text wrapping convention for corpus documents, tool-cached
   data files, and archival artifacts within the Crowsong Suite
   [CROWSONG].

   A CAHF-stamped file is a single UTF-8 plain-text file consisting of
   a self-describing comment header, an explicit sentinel line, and a
   document body.  The header declares provenance metadata and a SHA256
   digest of the body.  Any person, tool, or text editor can read the
   header, extract the body, and verify the digest offline without a
   database, manifest, or network connection.

   CAHF is a canonical-text convention, not a byte-for-byte container.
   Line endings are normalised to LF and trailing newlines are
   canonicalised during stamping.  The SHA256 is computed over this
   normalised body, ensuring that the same logical document produces the
   same digest across platforms.

   This document is both a specification and a conformance contract.
   Crowsong tools that produce or consume CAHF-stamped files MUST cite
   this document and MUST implement exactly the field names, sentinel
   line, normalisation rule, and hashing contract defined here.  Tool-
   local reimplementations are accepted and expected; shared imports are
   not required.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted for informational purposes.  It
   documents an internal convention of the Crowsong Suite rather than
   a general-purpose IETF protocol.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   documents or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 April 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
      1.1.  Motivation
      1.2.  Design Goals
      1.3.  Scope and Relationship to Other Tools
      1.4.  Terminology
   2.  File Structure
      2.1.  Overview
      2.2.  Header Block
      2.3.  Sentinel Line
      2.4.  Body
   3.  Field Definitions
      3.1.  Required Fields
      3.2.  Standard Optional Fields
      3.3.  Unknown Fields
   4.  Normalisation and Hashing
      4.1.  Line Ending Normalisation
      4.2.  Trailing Newline Canonicalisation
      4.3.  SHA256 Computation
      4.4.  Hashing Contract (Normative)
   5.  Stamping Procedure
   6.  Verification Procedure
      6.1.  Parsing
      6.2.  Body Extraction
      6.3.  Digest Verification
      6.4.  Error Handling
   7.  Partial and Legacy Compliance
      7.1.  Files Without a Sentinel
      7.2.  Files Without a SHA256 Field
      7.3.  Legacy Colon Separator
   8.  Conformance Requirements for Tool Implementors
      8.1.  Stamping Conformance
      8.2.  Verification Conformance
      8.3.  Independence Requirement
   9.  Security Considerations
      9.1.  Integrity vs. Authenticity
      9.2.  First-Fetch Trust
      9.3.  Unverified Cache Use
   10. IANA Considerations
   11. References
      11.1. Normative References
      11.2. Informative References
   12. Acknowledgements
   13. Author's Address
   A.  Canonical Examples
      A.1.  Minimal Stamped File
      A.2.  Full Corpus File (cmudict.dict pattern)
      A.3.  General Document (archivist.py pattern)
   B.  Known SHA256 Constants
   C.  Conformance Checklist

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Motivation

   The Crowsong Suite operates under the assumption that infrastructure
   may fail.  Corpus files are fetched once from remote sources and
   cached for indefinite offline use.  Artifacts are transmitted over
   degraded channels.  Tools are deployed independently, without shared
   libraries or a central verification service.

   In this environment, a cached file must carry its own verification
   credentials.  A tool verifying a file must be able to do so without
   contacting a remote server, importing a shared library, or reading a
   separate manifest.  A human operator must be able to inspect the
   file with a text editor and verify its digest with any SHA256
   calculator.

   CAHF satisfies these requirements with the simplest possible
   mechanism: a block of comment lines at the top of the file, a
   sentinel line marking where those comments end, and the document
   body below.

1.2.  Design Goals

   Human-readable.  Any literate person with a text editor can open a
      CAHF file, read the header, extract the body below the sentinel,
      and verify the SHA256 using a standard tool.  No Crowsong software
      is required to read or verify a CAHF file.

   Offline-verifiable.  Verification requires only the file itself.
      No network access, no external manifest, no central service.

   Platform-stable.  CRLF normalisation and trailing-newline
      canonicalisation ensure that the same logical document produces
      the same SHA256 on all platforms.

   Tool-independent.  Tools MUST implement CAHF locally.  Shared
      imports between Crowsong tools are NOT REQUIRED and NOT
      RECOMMENDED.  Operational independence takes priority over code
      reuse.

   Append-safe for metadata.  The SHA256 covers the body only.  Header
      fields (title, date, source URL) may be amended post-stamping
      without invalidating the digest.  The body is what matters; the
      header is metadata.

   Minimal.  CAHF introduces no binary structure, no custom parser
      requirements, and no dependencies beyond SHA256.  A text editor
      and a SHA256 calculator are sufficient for full manual compliance.

1.3.  Scope and Relationship to Other Tools

   CAHF is the shared file format for the following Crowsong tools:

      tools/archivist/archivist.py  --  General-purpose CAHF stamping
         and verification tool.  The reference implementation of the
         full CAHF specification including all optional fields.

      tools/texts/texts.py  --  Gutenberg corpus mirror.  Produces
         CAHF-stamped text files.  Verifies cached files using CAHF
         before use.

      tools/udhr/udhr.py  --  UDHR corpus mirror.  Produces CAHF-
         stamped text files for all extracted UDHR language versions.

      tools/cmudict/cmudict.py  --  CMU Pronouncing Dictionary mirror.
         Produces CAHF-stamped dictionary files.  cmudict.dict is an
         external corpus mirror and uses only the fields relevant to
         corpus provenance (SOURCE, SHA256).  This is a documented
         exception to the full optional field set; see Section 8.3.

   Any file stamped by any of these tools MUST be verifiable by any
   other tool that implements this specification.  This cross-tool
   verifiability is a stated property of CAHF.

   Tools implementing CAHF locally MUST NOT import archivist.py to do
   so.  Each tool maintains an independent implementation conforming to
   this specification.  This is intentional: survivability of
   individual tools under degraded deployment is prioritised over
   DRY-style code sharing.

1.4.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174].

   Stamping:  The process of wrapping a document body in a CAHF header,
      computing the SHA256, and writing the complete CAHF file.

   Verification:  The process of extracting the declared SHA256 from a
      CAHF header, recomputing the SHA256 over the body, and comparing
      the two values.

   Sentinel line:  The line "# ---END-HEADER---" which marks the
      boundary between the CAHF header and the document body.

   Normalised body:  The document body after CRLF-to-LF normalisation
      and trailing-newline canonicalisation, as defined in Section 4.

   Unstamped file:  A file that does not begin with "# ARCHIVIST" and
      does not contain a sentinel line.  Such files MUST NOT be
      reported as passing CAHF verification.

   Legacy file:  A CAHF-format file that uses a colon separator in
      header fields or that lacks a sentinel line.  See Section 7.

2.  File Structure

2.1.  Overview

   A CAHF-stamped file has the following structure:

      <header block>
      # ---END-HEADER---
      <body>

   The header block consists of one or more comment lines, each
   beginning with "# " (hash, space).  The sentinel line is the literal
   string "# ---END-HEADER---" followed by a newline.  The body begins
   immediately on the line following the sentinel.

   The complete file MUST be UTF-8 encoded.  Line endings in the stored
   file MUST be LF (U+000A).  CRLF is normalised on read; CAHF files
   MUST NOT be written with CRLF line endings.

2.2.  Header Block

   The header block consists of field lines and MAY include blank
   comment lines for readability.

   Each field line has the form:

      # <FIELD>  <value>

   where <FIELD> is an uppercase ASCII field name, two or more spaces
   separate the field name from the value, and <value> is arbitrary
   UTF-8 text not containing a newline.

   Canonical field line format uses exactly two spaces between the
   field name and the value:

      # SHA256    3a7f91c2b04e8d6f1a2b3c4d5e6f789012345678901234567890

   The first non-empty header line MUST be the ARCHIVIST marker field:

      # ARCHIVIST  v1.0

   This line MUST be present for a file to be considered stamped.
   Tools parsing CAHF files MUST gate on this line: if the first non-
   empty line of the file does not begin with "# ARCHIVIST", the file
   MUST be treated as unstamped without further header processing.

   Blank comment lines (containing only "#") MAY appear between field
   lines for readability and MUST be ignored during field parsing.

2.3.  Sentinel Line

   The sentinel line is the exact string:

      # ---END-HEADER---

   followed by a newline character (U+000A).

   The sentinel MUST appear as a complete line -- that is, it MUST be
   preceded by a newline (or be the first line of the file, which is
   not valid for a stamped file) and followed by a newline.

   Implementations MUST use "# ---END-HEADER---" verbatim.  Variations
   in spacing, capitalisation, or punctuation are NOT permitted and
   MUST NOT be recognised as valid sentinels.

   The body begins immediately after the newline that terminates the
   sentinel line.  There is no blank line between the sentinel and the
   body.  The format:

      # ---END-HEADER---\n<body>

   is canonical.  Tools writing CAHF files MUST NOT insert an additional
   blank line between the sentinel and the body.

   Rationale: An explicit, unique sentinel eliminates the structural
   ambiguity of blank-line-delimited headers when the body itself
   contains blank lines at the start.  It also provides a single,
   unambiguous split point for both parsers and human readers.

2.4.  Body

   The body is the document content.  In the stored CAHF file, the body
   begins immediately after the sentinel line and extends to the end of
   the file.

   For the purposes of SHA256 computation, the body is extracted and
   normalised per Section 4 before hashing.  The normalised body is
   what is hashed; the stored body (including any trailing newline
   appended by the stamping tool) is not hashed directly.

   See Section 4.4 for the precise hashing contract.

3.  Field Definitions

3.1.  Required Fields

   ARCHIVIST  The format marker.  Value MUST be "v1.0" for files
      conforming to this revision of the specification.  MUST be the
      first non-empty line of the header block.

      Example:  # ARCHIVIST  v1.0

   SHA256  The SHA256 digest of the normalised body, as a lowercase
      hexadecimal string of exactly 64 characters.  MUST be present for
      a file to be considered stamped.  A file with an ARCHIVIST marker
      but no SHA256 field MUST be treated as unstamped or damaged.

      Example:  # SHA256    3a7f91c2b04e8d6f1a2b3c4d5e6f7890...

3.2.  Standard Optional Fields

   The following fields are defined for use by Crowsong tools.
   Implementations SHOULD use these field names when the corresponding
   metadata is available.

   TITLE    Human-readable title of the document.
   AUTHOR   Author name(s).
   LANG     Language or script identifier (e.g., "en", "ar", "zh-Hans").
   SOURCE   Source URL or bibliographic reference.
   DATE     ISO 8601 date of stamping (YYYY-MM-DD).
   FETCHED  ISO 8601 date of first fetch, for corpus mirror files.
   ENTRIES  Count of dictionary/corpus entries, for structured data files.
   CHARS    Character count of the normalised body.
   LINES    Line count of the normalised body.
   TAGS     Comma-separated classification tags.
   TLP      Traffic Light Protocol classification (CLEAR/GREEN/AMBER/RED).
   NOTE     Freeform annotation.
   LICENSE  License of the document body.
   TOOL     Generating tool and version (e.g., "tools/cmudict/cmudict.py").

   All optional fields are included at the discretion of the stamping
   tool.  Their presence or absence does not affect verification.

3.3.  Unknown Fields

   Unknown fields encountered during parsing MUST be stored and MUST be
   displayed by tools that implement a "show" or metadata display
   function.  Unknown fields MUST be ignored for verification purposes.
   Unknown fields MUST NOT cause a parser to fail or skip the SHA256
   field.

   This forward-compatibility rule ensures that files stamped by a
   future revision of this specification remain parseable and
   verifiable by older tools.

4.  Normalisation and Hashing

4.1.  Line Ending Normalisation

   Before any processing (stamping or verification), the input text
   MUST be normalised so that all line endings are LF (U+000A).

   Normalisation MUST replace:
      *  CRLF (U+000D U+000A) with LF (U+000A)
      *  Bare CR (U+000D) with LF (U+000A)

   This normalisation MUST be applied in CRLF-first order: CRLF
   sequences MUST be replaced before bare CR sequences to avoid
   double-replacement.  Implementations MUST process in the order:
   replace "\r\n" with "\n", then replace remaining "\r" with "\n".

4.2.  Trailing Newline Canonicalisation

   After line ending normalisation, any trailing newline characters
   MUST be stripped from the end of the body before hashing.  Multiple
   trailing newlines collapse to zero trailing newlines for the purposes
   of SHA256 computation.

   Rationale: Different tools and editors append different numbers of
   trailing newlines.  Stripping trailing newlines before hashing
   ensures that the same logical content produces the same digest
   regardless of how it was saved.

4.3.  SHA256 Computation

   The SHA256 is computed over the UTF-8 encoding of the normalised
   body string (after line ending normalisation and trailing newline
   stripping).  The result is represented as a lowercase hexadecimal
   string of exactly 64 characters.

   In pseudocode:

      normalised_body = strip_trailing_newlines(normalise_line_endings(body))
      digest = sha256(encode_utf8(normalised_body)).hexdigest()

   Implementations MUST produce lowercase hex.  Uppercase hex in a
   declared SHA256 field SHOULD be accepted during verification but
   MUST NOT be emitted during stamping.

4.4.  Hashing Contract (Normative)

   This section states the complete hashing contract in unambiguous
   terms for tool implementors.

   Let body_fetched be the body content as received from an external
   source (e.g., a downloaded corpus file), after line ending
   normalisation per Section 4.1.

   Let body_stored be the body as written to the CAHF file.

   The following invariants MUST hold:

   (a) Stamping:
         body_for_hash = body_fetched.rstrip("\n")
         sha256_declared = sha256(body_for_hash.encode("utf-8")).hexdigest()

   (b) Storage:  body_stored MAY differ from body_fetched by at most
      one appended trailing newline.  That is:
         body_stored == body_for_hash + "\n"
      is the canonical form written to disk.

   (c) Verification:  To verify a stored CAHF file, extract the body
      after the sentinel line, strip exactly the trailing newline added
      by (b), and compute SHA256:
         body_extracted = content_after_sentinel
         body_for_hash  = body_extracted.rstrip("\n")
         sha256_actual  = sha256(body_for_hash.encode("utf-8")).hexdigest()

   (d) Consistency:  sha256_declared (computed in (a)) MUST equal
      sha256_actual (computed in (c)) for all correctly stamped files.

   This contract ensures that tools which stamp and tools which verify
   operate on the same logical body, regardless of whether an
   implementation strips newlines before hashing (at stamp time) or
   after reading (at verify time).

   Implementation note: "strip the trailing newline added by the cache
   wrapper" is the correct mental model for verification.  Stripping
   all trailing newlines (body.rstrip("\n")) is equally correct because
   (b) guarantees at most one was added.

5.  Stamping Procedure

   To stamp a document body with a CAHF header, a conformant
   implementation MUST:

   1.  Normalise line endings per Section 4.1.

   2.  Strip trailing newlines from the normalised body.

   3.  Compute the SHA256 per Section 4.3.

   4.  Build the header block.  The header block MUST begin with:

         # ARCHIVIST  v1.0

      followed by any desired optional fields, followed by the SHA256
      field.  Blank comment lines MAY be inserted for readability.

   5.  Write the complete CAHF file in this order:
         a.  Header block (all lines ending with LF)
         b.  Sentinel line: "# ---END-HEADER---\n"
         c.  Body (the normalised, trailing-newline-stripped body)
         d.  One trailing LF (U+000A)

   The complete file MUST end with exactly one LF.

   The field order within the header block is not normatively specified,
   except that ARCHIVIST MUST be first and SHA256 SHOULD be last.  The
   ordering ARCHIVIST, [metadata fields], CHARS, LINES, SHA256 is
   RECOMMENDED for readability.

6.  Verification Procedure

6.1.  Parsing

   To verify a CAHF file, a conformant implementation MUST:

   1.  Read the complete file as UTF-8 text.

   2.  Normalise line endings per Section 4.1.

   3.  Check the first non-empty line.  If it does not begin with
      "# ARCHIVIST", the file is unstamped.  Stop and report
      "unstamped" -- do NOT report PASS.

   4.  Locate the sentinel line "# ---END-HEADER---\n".  If absent,
      treat the file as legacy per Section 7.1.

   5.  Split the file at the sentinel into header text and body text.

   6.  Parse header fields per the rules in Section 2.2.

   7.  Locate the SHA256 field.  If absent, the file MUST be treated
      as damaged or legacy, not as passing.  Stop and report FAIL or
      UNSTAMPED as appropriate.

6.2.  Body Extraction

   The body text is the content of the file after the sentinel line.
   Apply Section 4.4(c): strip the trailing newline added by the
   stamping tool.

      body_for_hash = body_text.rstrip("\n")

   This produces the same string that was hashed during stamping.

6.3.  Digest Verification

   Compute:

      sha256_actual = sha256(body_for_hash.encode("utf-8")).hexdigest()

   Compare sha256_actual to the value declared in the SHA256 header
   field (case-insensitively).

   If they match: report PASS.
   If they do not match: report FAIL.  Both the declared and actual
   digests MUST be reported to the operator.

6.4.  Error Handling

   The following conditions MUST result in a FAIL or UNSTAMPED result,
   never a PASS:

      *  First non-empty line does not begin with "# ARCHIVIST"
      *  Sentinel line is absent (treat as legacy; see Section 7.1)
      *  SHA256 field is absent
      *  SHA256 field value is not a valid 64-character hex string
      *  SHA256 comparison fails
      *  File cannot be read or decoded as UTF-8

   Tools MUST NOT silently pass a file that cannot be verified.
   "Cannot verify" is not the same as "PASS".

7.  Partial and Legacy Compliance

7.1.  Files Without a Sentinel

   Files that begin with "# ARCHIVIST" but do not contain the sentinel
   line "# ---END-HEADER---" are considered legacy CAHF files.  These
   files predate this specification.

   Implementations MAY attempt to extract the body from legacy files
   using a blank-line delimiter (splitting at the first "\n\n" after
   the header block).  If they do, they MUST clearly report the file
   as "legacy format" rather than "PASS".

   Implementations MUST NOT silently verify legacy files as PASS.
   Operators MUST be informed that the file does not conform to the
   current sentinel-based format and SHOULD be prompted to re-stamp.

7.2.  Files Without a SHA256 Field

   A file that begins with "# ARCHIVIST" but contains no SHA256 field
   (whether sentinel is present or absent) MUST NOT be reported as
   passing verification.  It MUST be reported as FAIL or UNSTAMPED
   with a clear message indicating the absent digest.

   The correct and only acceptable message for this condition is a
   failure message.  No "unverifiable -- assumed OK" path is permitted.

7.3.  Legacy Colon Separator

   Some existing Crowsong corpus files use a colon separator in header
   fields rather than the canonical double-space separator:

      # SHA256:    3a7f91c2...    (legacy)
      # SHA256     3a7f91c2...    (canonical)

   Implementations MAY accept the colon separator during parsing.
   When doing so, the colon-separator path MUST be restricted to the
   set of known field names defined in Section 3.  Lines whose field
   name (the text before the colon) is not in the known field set MUST
   NOT be parsed as metadata fields.

   Rationale: Unrestricted colon parsing would misinterpret URLs and
   freeform comment text as metadata fields.

   Implementations MUST emit only the canonical double-space separator
   when writing new CAHF files.

8.  Conformance Requirements for Tool Implementors

8.1.  Stamping Conformance

   A conformant CAHF stamper MUST:

      *  Emit "# ARCHIVIST  v1.0" as the first line of the header.
      *  Emit the sentinel "# ---END-HEADER---" on its own line,
         with no additional blank line between sentinel and body.
      *  Compute SHA256 per Section 4.3 using the normalised,
         trailing-newline-stripped body.
      *  Emit SHA256 as lowercase hex in the SHA256 header field.
      *  Write the body followed by exactly one trailing LF.
      *  Normalise CRLF to LF in the stored file.

8.2.  Verification Conformance

   A conformant CAHF verifier MUST:

      *  Gate on "# ARCHIVIST" as the first non-empty line.
      *  Require the sentinel line.  Files lacking the sentinel MUST
         NOT be reported as PASS.
      *  Require a SHA256 field.  Files lacking SHA256 MUST NOT be
         reported as PASS.
      *  Extract the body by splitting at the sentinel and stripping
         the trailing newline per Section 4.4(c).
      *  Compute SHA256 identically to the stamper.
      *  Report both declared and actual digests on FAIL.
      *  Exit with a non-zero exit code on FAIL.

8.3.  Independence Requirement

   Each Crowsong tool that produces or consumes CAHF files MUST
   implement the CAHF stamping and verification logic locally.
   Importing archivist.py is NOT REQUIRED and NOT RECOMMENDED.

   The specification (this document) is the shared contract.  The
   implementation is the tool's own responsibility.

   Tools that implement a subset of optional fields (e.g., cmudict.py
   using SOURCE, ENTRIES, and SHA256 but not TITLE or AUTHOR) are
   conformant provided they:

      a.  Emit a correct ARCHIVIST marker and SHA256 field.
      b.  Emit the sentinel line correctly.
      c.  Implement verification faithfully per Section 6.

   Such tools SHOULD document their field subset in their own README,
   citing this specification.

9.  Security Considerations

9.1.  Integrity vs. Authenticity

   CAHF provides content integrity checking, not cryptographic
   authenticity.  The SHA256 in the header proves that the current body
   matches the declared digest.  It does not prove:

      *  Who created the document.
      *  That the header itself has not been replaced along with
         a recomputed SHA256.
      *  That the source from which the body was fetched was legitimate.

   For authenticity and non-repudiation, an external signing mechanism
   (e.g., Ed25519 per [RFC8032] or GPG per [RFC4880]) MUST be layered
   on top of the CAHF file.  The FDS Print Profile [FDS] defines such
   a mechanism for physical-media artifacts.

9.2.  First-Fetch Trust

   For tools that fetch remote content and stamp it with CAHF (e.g.,
   corpus mirrors), the SHA256 pinned in the header is only as
   trustworthy as the first fetch.  If the first fetch is intercepted:

      *  The attacker controls both the body and the SHA256 written to
         the header.
      *  Subsequent local verification passes against the
         attacker-controlled hash.

   Mitigations:

      *  Fetch MUST use HTTPS-only sources.  Plain HTTP sources MUST
         NOT be used as primary or fallback sources for any tool that
         pins a CAHF SHA256.  (See tools/cmudict/cmudict.py for a
         conformant example of this rule.)

      *  Where available, implementations SHOULD verify the fetched
         body against an independently-pinned expected digest before
         writing the CAHF file.

      *  For corpus files with stable expected content, a known-good
         digest MAY be committed to the repository and checked at
         fetch time.

9.3.  Unverified Cache Use

   Tools that read CAHF-stamped cached files SHOULD verify the SHA256
   before using the body for any downstream operation.  Loading and
   parsing a cached file without verification defeats the purpose of
   the CAHF header.

   Implementations SHOULD provide a verified load path that refuses to
   return body content if SHA256 verification fails.  An unverified
   load path MAY be provided but MUST be explicitly invoked and MUST
   NOT be the default.

   This requirement reflects the Crowsong operating assumption: cached
   content may have been tampered with, and the SHA256 check is the
   only local guard.

10. IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.  CAHF is an internal convention
   of the Crowsong Suite and does not request registration of any media
   types, URIs, or protocol parameters.

11. References

11.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, May 2017.

11.2. Informative References

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve Digital
              Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032, January 2017.

   [RFC4880]  Callas, J. et al., "OpenPGP Message Format", RFC 4880,
              November 2007.

   [CROWSONG]  Darley, T., "The Crowsong Suite", draft-darley-
              crowsong-00, work in progress.

   [FDS]      Darley, T., "Fox Decimal Script (FDS)", draft-darley-
              fds-00, 1 April 2026.

   [ARCHIVIST]  Darley, T., "archivist.py -- Self-describing document
              framing tool", MIT License, 2026.
              https://github.com/propertools/crowsong

12. Acknowledgements

   The Crowsong archivist format pattern -- self-describing headers,
   SHA256 over body only, append-safe metadata -- emerged from the
   shared conventions of tools/texts/texts.py and tools/udhr/udhr.py
   before it was named.  This document formalises what those tools
   already understood.

13. Author's Address

   Trey Darley
   Proper Tools SRL
   Brussels, Belgium

   Email: trey@propertools.be
   URI:   https://propertools.be

Appendix A.  Canonical Examples

A.1.  Minimal Stamped File

   The smallest valid CAHF file consists of the ARCHIVIST marker, a
   SHA256 field, the sentinel, and an empty body.

   The SHA256 of an empty body is the well-known constant:

      e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb924
      27ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855

   Minimal valid CAHF file:

      # ARCHIVIST  v1.0
      # SHA256    e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855
      # ---END-HEADER---

   (trailing newline follows the sentinel; body is empty)

   This file MUST pass verification.  The SHA256 of the empty body is
   well-defined and invariant; implementations SHOULD include it in
   their test suites.

A.2.  Full Corpus File (cmudict.dict pattern)

   The following is a conformant CAHF header for a corpus mirror file:

      # ARCHIVIST  v1.0
      #
      # TITLE     CMU Pronouncing Dictionary
      # SOURCE    https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cmusphinx/cmudict/master/cmudict.dict
      # FETCHED   2026-04-06
      # ENTRIES   134,373
      # LICENSE   Public domain (Carnegie Mellon University)
      # TOOL      tools/cmudict/cmudict.py
      #
      # CHARS     7,432,891
      # LINES     134,373
      # SHA256    <lowercase hex SHA256 of normalised body>
      # ---END-HEADER---
      A  EY1
      A(2)  EY1
      ...

   Notes:
      *  FETCHED is used instead of DATE for corpus mirror files to
         distinguish the fetch date from a document creation date.
      *  ENTRIES records the number of parsed dictionary entries.
      *  CHARS and LINES are computed over the normalised body.
      *  The sentinel follows immediately after the last header line.

A.3.  General Document (archivist.py pattern)

   The following is a conformant CAHF header for a general document,
   as produced by tools/archivist/archivist.py:

      # ARCHIVIST  v1.0
      # TITLE     Universal Declaration of Human Rights -- Arabic
      # AUTHOR    OHCHR
      # LANG      ar
      # SOURCE    https://www.ohchr.org/
      # DATE      2026-04-06
      # TLP       CLEAR
      # CHARS     14,732
      # LINES     312
      # SHA256    3a7f91c2b04e8d6f1a2b3c4d5e6f7890...
      # ---END-HEADER---
      [document body]

   The sentinel terminates the header; the body begins on the
   immediately following line.

Appendix B.  Known SHA256 Constants

   The following SHA256 values are invariant and SHOULD be used as
   test vectors in conformance test suites.

      Input          SHA256
      -----          ------
      (empty string) e3b0c44298fc1c149afbf4c8996fb92427ae41e4649b934ca495991b7852b855
      "hello\n"      (strip trailing newline -> "hello")
                     2cf24dba5fb0a30e26e83b2ac5b9e29e1b161e5c1fa7425e73043362938b9824
      "hello"        2cf24dba5fb0a30e26e83b2ac5b9e29e1b161e5c1fa7425e73043362938b9824

   Note: "hello\n" and "hello" produce the same digest because
   trailing newlines are stripped before hashing (Section 4.2).
   This is the expected and correct behaviour.

Appendix C.  Conformance Checklist

   This checklist is provided as a convenience for implementors.  It
   does not replace the normative text of the specification.

   Stamping:

      [ ] First header line is "# ARCHIVIST  v1.0"
      [ ] SHA256 is computed over normalised, trailing-newline-stripped body
      [ ] SHA256 is emitted as lowercase hex, exactly 64 characters
      [ ] Sentinel line is "# ---END-HEADER---" with no trailing spaces
      [ ] No blank line between sentinel and body
      [ ] Body is followed by exactly one LF
      [ ] File is written with LF line endings throughout
      [ ] File is UTF-8 encoded

   Verification:

      [ ] Gates on "# ARCHIVIST" as first non-empty line
      [ ] Requires sentinel; files without sentinel reported as legacy
      [ ] Requires SHA256 field; files without SHA256 reported as FAIL
      [ ] Extracts body by splitting at sentinel
      [ ] Strips trailing newline before hashing
      [ ] Reports both declared and actual SHA256 on FAIL
      [ ] Returns non-zero exit code on FAIL
      [ ] Does not report PASS for unstamped, legacy, or damaged files

   Cross-tool interoperability:

      [ ] A file stamped by this tool verifies correctly under
          tools/archivist/archivist.py verify
      [ ] A file stamped by tools/archivist/archivist.py verifies
          correctly under this tool
