Internet-Draft                                                 T. Darley
Intended status: Informational                          Proper Tools SRL
Expires: 2026-10-01                                        1 April 2026


           The Crowsong Suite
  A Modular Architecture for Communications Under Degraded,
        Disrupted, and Disconnected Conditions

        draft-darley-crowsong-00


Dedication

   This document is dedicated to the memory of Felix "FX" Lindner
   (1975-2026), who understood that the most important infrastructure
   is the kind you build before you need it, and who demonstrated
   this understanding in everything he made.


Abstract

   Existing resilient communications architectures generally assume
   that some digital transport remains available.  This document
   proposes a modular architecture for conditions in which IP
   connectivity, and potentially binary-capable transport itself,
   may be absent.

   The Crowsong Suite (RSS) composes five independently
   deployable layers spanning physical transport classification,
   human-legible encoding, delay-tolerant routing, threshold trust,
   and signed content continuity.  The stack builds on existing
   work, including RFC 4838 for routing, and composes established
   primitives such as Ed25519 and Shamir secret sharing.

   The defining requirement of the stack is graceful degradation to
   human legibility at every layer.  Messages MUST remain
   interpretable, verifiable, and transmissible even when reduced to
   manual transcription over non-binary channels.

   This property is not a fallback.  It is a design constraint.


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current
   Internet-Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
   as reference documents or to cite them other than as "work in
   progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 1 October 2026.


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.


Table of Contents

   1.   Introduction
     1.1.  Motivation
     1.2.  Design Philosophy
     1.3.  Scope and Non-Goals
     1.4.  Terminology
     1.5.  Relationship to Existing Work
   2.   Stack Architecture Overview
   3.   L1 -- Physical Transport Layer
     3.1.  Channel Classification
     3.2.  Channel Properties
     3.3.  Channel Selection Guidance
   4.   L2 -- Encoding Layer: Fox Decimal Script (FDS)
     4.1.  Motivation
     4.2.  Encoding Specification (UCS-DEC)
     4.3.  FDS-FRAME: Framing and Error Detection
     4.4.  Authentication Extension
     4.5.  Binary Payload Encoding
     4.6.  Transport Compatibility Matrix
     4.7.  Reference Implementation
   5.   L3 -- Routing Layer: Delay-Tolerant Networking
     5.1.  Relationship to RFC 4838
     5.2.  DTN-BUNDLE-FDS: Bundles over Non-Binary Channels
     5.3.  Node Identity
     5.4.  Routing Strategies
   6.   L4 -- Trust Layer
     6.1.  Key Primitives
     6.2.  SHARD-BUNDLE: Shamir Distribution over FDS Channels
     6.3.  MIRROR-ATTESTATION: M-of-N Content Verification
     6.4.  Key Custody Across Physical Media
   7.   L5 -- Content Layer: Meridian Protocol
     7.1.  Relationship to draft-darley-meridian-protocol-01
     7.2.  Succession Packet
     7.3.  The Time Capsule as a Protocol Object
   8.   Deployment Scenarios
     8.1.  Normal Operations (full IP stack available)
     8.2.  Degraded Operations (intermittent connectivity)
     8.3.  Disrupted Operations (DTN-only, no IP)
     8.4.  Post-Disruption Recovery (human relay, physical media)
     8.5.  Air-Gapped Environments
     8.6.  Extreme Latency: Physical Archival
   9.   Security Considerations
        The stack separates error detection, authenticity, and
   confidentiality; each MUST be considered independently.  FDS
   encoding provides error detection only.  Ed25519 signatures
   provide authenticity.  Confidentiality requires an additional
   encryption layer and is outside the scope of this document.

9.1.  Channel-Specific Threats
     9.2.  Key Management at Reduced Capability
     9.3.  Human-Relay Trust
     9.4.  Replay and Sequencing
   10.  IANA Considerations
   11.  References
     11.1. Normative References
     11.2. Informative References
   12.  Acknowledgements
   13.  Author's Address


1.  Introduction

1.1.  Motivation

   The history of communications infrastructure is punctuated by
   failure.  Network partitions, power outages, physical destruction,
   economic collapse, and deliberate interdiction have repeatedly
   reduced or eliminated digital connectivity in environments where
   it was previously assumed.

   Existing resilient communications protocols address degraded
   conditions: reduced bandwidth, increased latency, or intermittent
   connectivity.  RFC 4838 [RFC4838] defines Delay-Tolerant
   Networking (DTN) for precisely this environment.

   This document addresses a more severe condition: the absence of
   any reliable binary-capable transport.  When the only available
   media are text-constrained, symbol-constrained, or human-mediated
   channels, existing protocol guidance is limited.

   The Crowsong Suite defines an architecture that spans
   this gap, extending communications continuity from degraded
   digital transport down to fully human-relayed transmission.

   The Crowsong Suite fills this gap by specifying a layered
   architecture whose defining property is graceful degradation to
   human legibility.  Every layer of the stack can be operated, at
   reduced capability, by a human without software.  This is not a
   theoretical property.  It has operational consequences at every
   layer of the design.

   The immediate motivation for this work is the Aeolian Layer
   [AEOLIAN] -- a kite-borne delay-tolerant mesh network designed
   for communications continuity under infrastructure failure -- but
   the stack is general-purpose and applicable to any environment
   where communications must survive the loss of IP infrastructure.

1.2.  Design Philosophy

   The Crowsong Suite is designed around six principles:

   Composability.  Each layer is independently deployable and
      useful.  A partial deployment is valid.  Layers do not require
      the presence of layers above or below them.

   Graceful degradation to human legibility.  Every layer must be
      operable, at reduced capability, by a human without software.
      This is a hard requirement, not a stretch goal.

   Physical-layer independence.  The encoding and routing layers
      must not assume any particular physical medium.  The stack
      must operate over LoRa, Morse, fax, acoustic, optical, print,
      and human transcription without modification.

   Composability with existing standards.  The stack does not
      redefine cryptography, content addressing, archive formats,
      or feed syndication.  It composes existing standards and defers
      to them: RFC 4838 for routing, Ed25519 for signing,
      Shamir [SHAMIR] for secret distribution, and the Meridian
      Protocol [MERIDIAN] for content sovereignty.

   Explicit trust.  Trust relationships are named, bounded, and
      cryptographically verifiable.  The stack does not rely on
      implicit trust in infrastructure.

   Longitudinal integrity.  The stack must support messages with
      delivery latencies ranging from milliseconds to decades.  A
      message sealed in a physical archive and recovered fifty years
      later is a valid message.  The stack must be able to verify
      its integrity.

1.3.  Scope and Non-Goals

   This document specifies the architecture and interfaces of the
   Crowsong Suite.  Detailed specifications of individual
   components are provided at the level necessary to ensure
   interoperability; some components (particularly FDS) are fully
   specified here, while others (DTN-BUNDLE-FDS, SHARD-BUNDLE)
   are specified at the interface level with detailed wire formats
   deferred to companion documents.

   This document does not specify:

   *  Physical layer protocols or hardware (these are inputs to L1,
      not outputs of this document)

   *  Key generation procedures (authors SHOULD follow applicable
      best practices for Ed25519 key generation and storage)

   *  Legal or jurisdictional considerations arising from the use
      of cryptography or the transmission of content across borders

   *  Mechanisms for resolving disputes between parties operating
      components of the stack

1.4.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
   NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
   "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
   described in BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when,
   they appear in all capitals.

   The following terms are used throughout this document:

   Channel:  A physical or logical medium capable of carrying
      discrete symbols between two or more parties.  Channels are
      classified in Section 3.1.

   Bundle:  A self-contained unit of data including payload,
      metadata, and sufficient context for delivery.  The term
      is used consistently with RFC 4838.

   FDS Frame:  A bundle encoded using Fox Decimal Script and
      wrapped in the framing structure defined in Section 4.3.

   Shard:  A fragment of a secret produced by Shamir secret
      sharing [SHAMIR], such that a threshold number of shards
      are required to reconstruct the secret.

   Node:  A participant in the routing layer, identified by a
      persistent signature.  A node may be a software process,
      a hardware device, a human operator, or a physical archive.

   Extreme Latency Node:  A node whose delivery latency is
      measured in months, years, or decades.  A buried physical
      archive is an extreme latency node.

   Human Relay:  A person who receives, transcribes, and
      retransmits a message.  Human relays are valid participants
      in the routing layer.

   Operator:  A person or organisation responsible for operating
      one or more components of the stack.

1.5.  Relationship to Existing Work

   RFC 4838 [RFC4838] defines the DTN architecture and the Bundle
   Protocol.  The Crowsong Suite extends DTN to non-binary
   channels by interposing the FDS encoding layer between the
   Bundle Protocol and physical transports that cannot carry binary
   data.  RFC 4838 is a normative dependency of L3.

   The Meridian Protocol [MERIDIAN] defines a signed site manifest
   format, delta-synchronization mechanism, and DNS failover record
   type for web content preservation.  Meridian is composed at L5
   of the Crowsong Suite.  The stack's trust and encoding
   layers provide Meridian with distribution mechanisms operable
   under conditions where DNS and HTTP are unavailable.

   Shamir Secret Sharing [SHAMIR] is composed at L4 to provide
   threshold key custody and content attestation.  The credmgr
   reference implementation [CREDMGR] demonstrates the operational
   pattern that L4 formalises.

   The L2 encoding layer (Fox Decimal Script) is fully specified
   in companion document draft-darley-fds-00 [FDS].  The L4 trust
   primitives are specified in companion document
   draft-darley-shard-bundle-00 [SHARD].  This document specifies
   the architecture and layer interfaces; companion documents
   provide wire-format specifications for individual layers.

   DNSSEC [RFC4033] and Ed25519 [RFC8032] provide the cryptographic
   primitives used at L4 and L5.

   The Delay-Tolerant Networking Research Group (DTNRG) work on
   Licklider Transmission Protocol [RFC5326] and related protocols
   are informative references for L3 implementors.


2.  Stack Architecture Overview

   The Crowsong Suite comprises five layers:

      ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
      │  L5  CONTENT LAYER                                     │
      │      Meridian Protocol                                 │
      │      Signed manifests, asset graphs, succession terms  │
      │      Author sovereignty, URL continuity                │
      ├────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
      │  L4  TRUST LAYER                                       │
      │      Shamir secret sharing, Ed25519 signing            │
      │      Multi-party attestation, key custody              │
      │      SHARD-BUNDLE, MIRROR-ATTESTATION                  │
      ├────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
      │  L3  ROUTING LAYER                                     │
      │      Delay-Tolerant Networking (RFC 4838)              │
      │      Store-and-forward, bundle protocol                │
      │      DTN-BUNDLE-FDS for non-binary channels            │
      │      Node identity, opportunistic routing              │
      ├────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
      │  L2  ENCODING LAYER                                    │
      │      Fox Decimal Script (FDS / UCS-DEC)                │
      │      Physical-layer agnostic serialisation             │
      │      Human-transcribable, machine-verifiable           │
      │      FDS-FRAME with error detection and auth           │
      ├────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
      │  L1  PHYSICAL TRANSPORT LAYER (pluggable)              │
      │  LoRa mesh │ Morse │ Fax │ QR │ Acoustic │ Optical     │
      │  Print/OCR │ USB sneakernet │ HF shortwave             │
      │  Kite-borne RF │ Human courier │ Physical archive      │
      └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

   L2 provides a transport-neutral, human-legible serialization
   substrate; it does not redefine routing or trust semantics.

   Each layer presents a defined interface to the layer above and
   below it.  The interface between L1 and L2 is a stream of
   discrete symbols (characters, digits, or equivalent).  The
   interface between L2 and L3 is a sequence of Unicode code
   points.  The interface between L3 and L4 is a verified bundle.
   The interface between L4 and L5 is an authenticated, integrity-
   checked payload with verified key provenance.

   A partial deployment omitting one or more layers is valid.
   A deployment of L2 over L1 with no L3 routing is a valid and
   useful configuration for point-to-point messaging over non-
   binary channels.  A deployment of L4 with no L3 (shard
   distribution via physical courier, with no DTN routing) is
   valid for key custody over physical media.

   The stack deliberately mirrors the structure of the OSI reference
   model without claiming equivalence to it.  The numbering is
   chosen for conceptual clarity, not for compatibility with
   existing layer numbering conventions.


3.  L1 -- Physical Transport Layer

3.1.  Channel Classification

   The Crowsong Suite classifies physical channels into
   four categories based on their symbol-carrying capability:

   Class A -- Binary-capable channels.  Channels that can carry
      arbitrary binary data.  IP networks, LoRa, AX.25 packet
      radio, Bluetooth, serial links.  These channels can carry
      DTN bundles directly.  FDS encoding at L2 is not required
      for Class A channels but MAY be used for interoperability
      with systems that require human-legible encoding.

   Class B -- Text-capable channels.  Channels that can carry
      printable ASCII or Unicode text but not arbitrary binary.
      Fax, email systems with encoding constraints, printed page,
      OCR pipelines, SMS.  FDS encoding is REQUIRED for L3
      bundles carried over Class B channels.

   Class C -- Symbol-capable channels.  Channels that can carry
      a finite alphabet of discrete symbols but not full text.
      Morse code, flag semaphore, signal lamps, blink patterns.
      FDS encoding using a subset of the decimal digit alphabet
      is REQUIRED for Class C channels.  Mapping from FDS digits
      to channel symbols is channel-specific and outside the
      scope of this document.

   Class D -- Human-relay channels.  Channels in which symbol
      production, error correction, and forwarding decisions are
      materially coupled to human cognition.  No assumptions about
      fidelity or bandwidth are made.  FDS encoding is REQUIRED.
      Messages SHOULD be structured for maximum transcription
      accuracy (see Section 4.2).

3.2.  Channel Properties

   The following properties are relevant to channel selection and
   routing decisions at L3:

   Bandwidth:  Symbols per unit time.  Ranges from bits per
      second (LoRa at low spreading factor) to words per minute
      (human transcription) to pages per day (physical courier).

   Latency:  Time from transmission to reception.  Ranges from
      milliseconds (LoRa) to years (physical archive).

   Error rate:  Probability of symbol corruption in transit.
      FDS encoding provides error detection; forward error
      correction is outside the scope of this document but
      SHOULD be applied for channels with high error rates.

   Directionality:  Whether the channel supports bidirectional
      communication.  Some channels (broadcast RF, printed page,
      physical archive) are unidirectional.  Routing at L3 MUST
      handle unidirectional channels.

   Legibility:  Whether a human can read the channel output
      without software.  All Class B, C, and D channels are
      legible by definition.  Legibility is a secondary property
      of Class A channels when FDS encoding is applied.

   Durability:  Whether the channel output persists after
      transmission.  Printed pages and physical archives are
      durable.  RF transmissions are not.  Durable channels
      support extreme-latency delivery.

3.3.  Channel Selection Guidance

   Operators SHOULD select channels based on the following
   priority order when multiple channels are available:

   1.  Class A channels with DTN support (lowest latency, highest
       bandwidth, no encoding overhead)

   2.  Class A channels without DTN support (requires bundle
       framing but no encoding)

   3.  Class B channels (requires FDS encoding; latency and
       bandwidth reduced)

   4.  Class C channels (requires FDS encoding and symbol
       mapping; significant bandwidth reduction)

   5.  Class D channels (human relay; treat as Class C with
       additional error probability)

   6.  Physical archive (extreme latency; treat as Class D
       with delivery latency measured in years to decades)

   In disrupted environments, lower-priority channels MUST be
   used when higher-priority channels are unavailable.  The
   stack is designed for this scenario.


4.  L2 -- Encoding Layer: Fox Decimal Script (FDS)

4.1.  Motivation

   Binary encodings optimise for bandwidth.  FDS optimises for
   survivability: the ability of a message to traverse any channel
   that can carry decimal digits, to be read and transcribed by any
   literate person, and to be verified without software.

   FDS encodes Unicode text as zero-padded decimal integers, one
   per Unicode code point, arranged in fixed-width fields and
   optionally formatted in columns.  The encoding is stateless,
   deterministic, and trivially reversible.  A message encoded in
   FDS can be decoded by any person with a Unicode code point table
   and the patience to perform integer lookup.

   The informal name Fox Decimal Script honours the kitsune --
   the fox of Japanese folklore, guardian of thresholds and
   messenger between worlds.  The formal designation is UCS-DEC
   (Unicode Character Set, Decimal encoding).

4.2.  Encoding Specification (UCS-DEC)

   Input:  Arbitrary Unicode text, normalised to NFC [UAX15]
      before encoding.  Implementors SHOULD normalise input;
      implementations MUST document whether they normalise.

   Transformation:  Each character is converted as follows:

      codepoint = ord(character)
      encoded   = zero_pad(decimal(codepoint), width)

   Field width:  Default 5 digits (range 00000-99999).  This
      covers Unicode code points U+0000 through U+1869F,
      encompassing the Basic Multilingual Plane and the majority
      of supplementary planes in common use.

      For content requiring code points above U+1869F, a 7-digit
      extended field width (0000000-1114111) MUST be used.
      The field width MUST be declared in the FDS-FRAME header
      (Section 4.3).  Mixing field widths within a single frame
      is NOT RECOMMENDED.

   Tokenisation:  Encoded values are separated by single spaces.
      No additional delimiters are used.

   Column formatting:  Values MAY be arranged in columns for
      human legibility.  The default column width is 6 values
      per row (COL/6).  This default is not arbitrary: six values
      per row produces rows of consistent visual length, aligns
      with common line-width constraints on Class B and C
      channels, and produces a visual rhythm that aids human
      verification.

      Column width is declared in the FDS-FRAME header and MAY
      be set to any positive integer or to 0 (no column
      formatting).

   Padding:  Trailing null values (00000) MAY be appended to
      complete the final row to full column width.  Null values
      MUST be skipped during decoding unless the --keep-null
      flag is specified.  Padding semantics: null represents
      no-op.  The presence of padding MUST be declared in the
      frame header.

   Example encoding (COL/6, field width 5):

      Input: "Hello"

      H  = 72  → 00072
      e  = 101 → 00101
      l  = 108 → 00108
      l  = 108 → 00108
      o  = 111 → 00111
      LF = 10  → 00010

      Encoded:
      00072  00101  00108  00108  00111  00010

4.3.  FDS-FRAME: Framing and Error Detection

   An FDS-FRAME wraps an encoded payload with a header providing
   encoding parameters and a trailer providing integrity
   verification.  FDS-FRAME is OPTIONAL for point-to-point use
   but REQUIRED when carrying DTN bundles at L3 or trust
   primitives at L4.

   CRC-32 provides detection of accidental transmission errors.
   Cryptographic authenticity MUST be provided separately via
   signatures (Section 4.4).

   Frame structure:

      HEADER
      ------
      A single line of the form:

         ENC: UCS · DEC · COL/<n> · PAD/<pad> · WIDTH/<w>

      Fields:
         COL/<n>    Column width (default: COL/6)
         PAD/<pad>  Padding value (default: PAD/00000)
         WIDTH/<w>  Field width in digits (default: WIDTH/5)

      Additional fields MAY be appended separated by " · ".
      Unknown fields MUST be ignored by decoders.

      PAYLOAD
      -------
      FDS-encoded content, formatted per the header parameters.

      TRAILER
      -------
      A single line of the form:

         <n> VALUES · CRC32:<hex> · VERIFY COUNT BEFORE USE

      Where <n> is the total number of encoded values (excluding
      padding) and <hex> is the CRC-32 [ISO3309] of the decoded
      byte sequence.

      When integrity verification fails, decoders MUST NOT use
      the decoded content.  The canonical trailer line for a
      frame that MUST NOT be used after integrity failure is:

         IF COUNT FAILS: DESTROY IMMEDIATELY

      This line SHOULD be included in frames carrying key
      material or other sensitive content.

   Example FDS-FRAME:

      ENC: UCS · DEC · COL/6 · PAD/00000 · WIDTH/5
      00072  00101  00108  00108  00111  00010
      00000  00000  00000  00000  00000  00000
      6 VALUES · CRC32:3610A686 · VERIFY COUNT BEFORE USE
      IF COUNT FAILS: DESTROY IMMEDIATELY

4.4.  Authentication Extension

   FDS-FRAME MAY carry an Ed25519 [RFC8032] signature over the
   decoded payload.  When present, the signature is encoded as
   a base64url string in the header:

      ENC: UCS · DEC · COL/6 · PAD/00000 · WIDTH/5
      SIG: ED25519 · <base64url-encoded Ed25519 signature>

   The signature covers the UTF-8 encoding of the decoded payload
   (after null removal), not the FDS-encoded representation.
   Implementations MUST verify the signature against the sender's
   known public key before using the decoded content.

   The public key MUST be distributed out-of-band or via a
   SHARD-BUNDLE (Section 6.2).  FDS-FRAME does not specify a
   key distribution mechanism.

4.5.  Binary Payload Encoding

   Binary payloads (DTN bundles, encrypted data, compressed
   archives) MUST be base64url-encoded [RFC4648] before FDS
   encoding.  The resulting base64url string is then encoded
   as FDS in the normal manner.

   The header MUST declare binary encoding:

      ENC: UCS · DEC · COL/6 · PAD/00000 · WIDTH/5 · B64

   Decoders MUST base64url-decode the decoded text after FDS
   decoding when the B64 flag is present.

4.6.  Transport Compatibility Matrix

   Channel Class  FDS Required  Binary Payload  Notes
   -------------  ------------  --------------  -----
   A (binary)     OPTIONAL      Direct          FDS adds legibility
   B (text)       REQUIRED      Via B64         Standard deployment
   C (symbol)     REQUIRED      Via B64         Symbol mapping needed
   D (human)      REQUIRED      NOT RECOMMENDED Avoid binary in human
                                                relay when possible

4.7.  Reference Implementation

   A reference implementation of FDS encoding and decoding is
   provided in ucs_dec_tool.py [UCSDEC].  The implementation is
   MIT-licensed and has no external dependencies beyond the Python
   3 standard library.

   The canonical test vector is the poem "Second Law Blues"
   [SLB], encoded as flash paper artifact SI-2084-FP-001.
   Implementations MUST produce output consistent with this
   artifact when encoding the canonical poem text.

   Usage:

      # Encode
      echo "Signal survives." | python3 ucs_dec_tool.py --encode

      # Decode
      cat encoded.txt | python3 ucs_dec_tool.py --decode

      # Verify
      cat encoded.txt | python3 ucs_dec_tool.py --verify


5.  L3 -- Routing Layer: Delay-Tolerant Networking

5.1.  Relationship to RFC 4838

   The Crowsong Suite uses the DTN architecture defined
   in RFC 4838 [RFC4838] for L3 routing.  RFC 4838 specifies
   store-and-forward messaging over links that may be intermittent,
   unidirectional, or subject to very long and variable delays.
   This is precisely the routing environment of the Resilient
   Signal Stack.

   RFC 4838 assumes that bundles can be handed to a convergence
   layer that carries them over some physical link.  The stack
   extends this model by specifying the FDS encoding layer as the
   convergence layer for non-binary channels (Class B, C, and D).

   The Bundle Protocol [RFC5050] and its successor [RFC9171]
   define the wire format for DTN bundles.  These formats are
   used without modification at L3.  When bundles are carried
   over non-binary channels, they are encoded as binary payloads
   per Section 4.5 before FDS encoding.

5.2.  DTN-BUNDLE-FDS: Bundles over Non-Binary Channels

   DTN-BUNDLE-FDS is the convergence layer adaptor that enables
   RFC 4838/RFC 9171 bundles to be carried over Class B, C, and
   D channels via FDS encoding.

   The encapsulation procedure is:

   1.  Serialise the DTN bundle per RFC 9171 (CBOR encoding).

   2.  base64url-encode the serialised bundle [RFC4648].

   3.  Encode the base64url string as an FDS-FRAME with the B64
       flag set (Section 4.5).

   4.  Prepend a bundle identifier header:

          BUNDLE: DTN · RFC9171 · <bundle-id>

       Where <bundle-id> is the source EID and creation timestamp
       of the bundle, encoded as a human-readable string.

   5.  Transmit the FDS-FRAME over the available channel.

   The decapsulation procedure is the reverse.  Implementations
   MUST verify the FDS-FRAME CRC-32 before attempting bundle
   deserialisation.  Implementations MUST verify the bundle's
   integrity per RFC 9171 before delivering to the application
   layer.

5.3.  Node Identity

   Each node in the routing layer is identified by a persistent
   Ed25519 public key.  The node's identity is derived from
   its public key and does not change when the node's physical
   location, IP address, or operator changes.

   Node identities MAY be given human-readable names for
   operational convenience (AE-047 "Sombra", AE-031 "Perrine",
   etc.).  These names are advisory only.  The cryptographic
   identity is authoritative.

   Human relay nodes (Class D channel operators) are assigned
   transient identities by their operating organisation and do
   not require persistent keypairs.  Messages relayed through
   human relays are authenticated by the originating node's
   signature, not by the relay operator's identity.

   A node whose operator has become unavailable but whose
   identity key material remains accessible (e.g., recovered
   via SHARD-BUNDLE per Section 6.2) remains a valid node.
   The trust implications of operating a node under recovered
   key material are outside the scope of this document.

5.4.  Routing Strategies

   L3 routing strategy is selected based on available channel
   information and operational context:

   Geographic routing:  Route bundles toward the destination's
      known or estimated geographic location.  Appropriate when
      node locations are known and relatively stable.

   Opportunistic routing:  Route bundles to any available
      forwarding node and rely on store-and-forward propagation
      to deliver them toward the destination.  Appropriate when
      node locations are unknown or unstable.

   Trust-based routing:  Prefer forwarding through nodes with
      established trust relationships (repeated successful
      contact history).  Appropriate when node identities are
      known and verifiable.

   The routing strategy MAY change dynamically based on
   available channel information.  Implementations SHOULD
   support all three strategies and select among them based
   on current network conditions.

   A node that has been unreachable for an extended period but
   whose stored bundles remain intact is NOT considered failed.
   Bundles addressed to such a node SHOULD be retained until
   the node's custodial time-to-live expires.


6.  L4 -- Trust Layer

6.1.  Key Primitives

   These primitives are composed from existing standards; no new
   cryptographic constructions are introduced.

   The trust layer provides three primitives:

   Ed25519 signing and verification [RFC8032]:  Used to
      authenticate messages, bundles, manifests, and node
      identities throughout the stack.  All signing in the
      Crowsong Suite uses Ed25519.

   Shamir (k,n) threshold secret sharing [SHAMIR]:  Used to
      distribute key material and other secrets across n
      shard holders such that any k holders can reconstruct
      the secret.  The threshold scheme enables key recovery
      without requiring any single party to hold the complete
      secret.

   Multi-party attestation:  A generalisation of Shamir
      threshold schemes to content verification.  M-of-N
      designated parties independently verify and sign a
      content hash.  M verified signatures constitute
      attestation.

6.2.  SHARD-BUNDLE: Shamir Distribution over FDS Channels

   SHARD-BUNDLE is the mechanism for distributing Shamir shards
   over any channel supported by the stack, including non-binary
   channels.

   A SHARD-BUNDLE is an FDS-FRAME carrying a single Shamir shard
   plus the metadata necessary for the recipient to understand
   its role in the threshold scheme and to contact other shard
   holders.

   SHARD-BUNDLE structure (encoded as FDS-FRAME payload):

      SHARD: <shard-index>/<total-shards> · T/<threshold>
      SECRET: <secret-identifier>
      HOLDER: <recipient-identifier>
      CONTACTS: <contact-list for other shard holders>
      ---
      <shard-material>
      ---
      RECOVERY: Join <threshold> of <total-shards> shards using
      Shamir (k,n) reconstruction.  See CONTACTS for other
      shard holders.

   The shard material is the raw Shamir shard, base64url-encoded.

   The contact list SHOULD include sufficient information to
   reach other shard holders over any available channel: name,
   electronic contact, physical address if appropriate, and
   the shard holder's public key fingerprint.

   SHARD-BUNDLEs MAY be transmitted over any channel in the
   stack, including physical media.  A SHARD-BUNDLE printed
   on archival paper and sealed in a physical archive is a
   valid shard distribution mechanism.  The shard holder is
   then a human (or the successor organisation designated to
   hold that shard) rather than a networked node.

   Implementors are referred to the credmgr reference
   implementation [CREDMGR] for operational patterns for
   shard distribution and recovery.

6.3.  MIRROR-ATTESTATION: M-of-N Content Verification

   MIRROR-ATTESTATION extends the Shamir threshold model from
   secret custody to content integrity verification.

   A MIRROR-ATTESTATION requires M of N designated mirror
   operators to independently verify and sign the root hash
   of a Meridian manifest (Section 7).  The composite of M
   verified signatures constitutes attestation that the
   mirrored content matches the author's manifest.

   MIRROR-ATTESTATION structure:

      ATTEST: <manifest-domain> · v<manifest-version>
      ROOT: <hex-encoded manifest root hash>
      REQUIRED: <M> of <N>
      SIGNATURES:
        <mirror-1-FQDN>: <base64url Ed25519 sig over root hash>
        <mirror-2-FQDN>: <base64url Ed25519 sig over root hash>
        ...

   Failover SHOULD require M verified signatures before
   activating, where M is specified in the Meridian manifest's
   succession terms.  This prevents premature failover due to
   a compromised or erroneous mirror.

6.4.  Key Custody Across Physical Media

   The trust layer explicitly supports key custody via physical
   media.  A private key (or Shamir shard thereof) stored on
   archival paper, sealed in a physical archive, and buried
   under known-stable conditions is a valid key custody
   mechanism.

   Physical key custody SHOULD follow the material specifications
   of [ARCHIVE-PROTOCOL] or equivalent archival standards.
   Implementations SHOULD include sufficient context in
   physically stored key material for a human recipient to
   understand its purpose and use without software documentation.

   The extreme case of physical key custody -- a private key
   encoded in FDS, printed on archival paper, sealed in a
   Mylar bag with silica gel, placed in a gasket-sealed
   container, and buried below the frost line -- is a valid
   and useful configuration.  The recovery procedure is
   documented in plaintext in the same container.


7.  L5 -- Content Layer: Meridian Protocol

7.1.  Relationship to draft-darley-meridian-protocol-01

   The Meridian Protocol [MERIDIAN] provides L5 of the Resilient
   Signal Stack.  Meridian defines a signed site manifest format,
   a delta-synchronization mechanism, and a DNS resource record
   type (MIRROR RR) for web content preservation and failover.

   The Crowsong Suite provides Meridian with distribution
   mechanisms operable under conditions where DNS and HTTP are
   unavailable.  Specifically:

   *  Meridian manifests MAY be distributed as FDS-FRAME messages
      over any channel in the stack.

   *  Meridian signing keys MAY be distributed via SHARD-BUNDLE
      over any channel, including physical media.

   *  Meridian failover conditions MAY be verified via
      MIRROR-ATTESTATION rather than (or in addition to) DNS-
      based liveness checking.

   *  Meridian succession packets (Section 7.2) MAY be
      instantiated as physical archives (Section 7.3).

7.2.  Succession Packet

   A SUCCESSION-PACKET is a self-contained bundle carrying all
   information necessary to activate Meridian failover and
   continue operation of a preserved site.

   SUCCESSION-PACKET contents:

   1.  The current Meridian manifest (latest signed version)

   2.  SHARD-BUNDLEs for the signing key (one per designated
       shard holder, pre-addressed)

   3.  MIRROR-ATTESTATION records (pre-computed, pending M-of-N
       signature collection)

   4.  Activation conditions in human-readable form:
       - Trigger events (e.g., confirmed origin unavailability
         for N days; death or incapacity of author)
       - Recovery threshold (M-of-N for key reconstruction)
       - Designated steward contact information

   5.  Human-readable context page (see [ARCHIVE-PROTOCOL])
       explaining the purpose and use of the packet without
       requiring software documentation

   The SUCCESSION-PACKET MAY be distributed electronically
   (via DTN-BUNDLE-FDS or standard IP channels) or physically
   (as a sealed archive per Section 7.3).  Both modes are valid.

7.3.  The Time Capsule as a Protocol Object

   A physical archive -- a sealed, durable container holding
   printed documents on archival-quality media -- is a valid
   node in the Crowsong Suite.

   A physical archive instantiating a SUCCESSION-PACKET is an
   extreme-latency store-and-forward node with the following
   properties:

   *  Delivery latency: months to decades

   *  Channel class: D (human relay, upon recovery)

   *  Durability: dependent on material specification and
      burial conditions (see [ARCHIVE-PROTOCOL])

   *  Capacity: limited by container volume; sufficient for
      manifests, key shards, and context documentation

   *  Authentication: Ed25519 signature, printed and verifiable
      by any implementation with access to the public key

   *  Error detection: FDS value count and CRC-32, printed in
      the trailer; verifiable by human inspection

   The recovery procedure for a physical archive is a human
   relay operation (Class D channel) in which the recovering
   party reads, verifies, and retransmits the archive contents
   via whatever channels are available at recovery time.

   Physical archives SHOULD include the FDS decoding procedure
   in human-readable form, independent of any software
   documentation, so that a recovering party without access to
   reference implementations can decode and verify the contents.


8.  Deployment Scenarios

8.1.  Normal Operations (full IP stack available)

   In normal operations, the stack operates over Class A channels.
   L2 FDS encoding is OPTIONAL (it MAY be used for interoperability
   with mixed environments).  L3 DTN routing operates via standard
   convergence layers (TCP/IP, UDP/IP).  L4 trust layer operates
   via standard PKI and network-accessible Shamir implementations.
   L5 Meridian operates via DNS and HTTPS.

   The primary value of the stack in normal operations is the
   preparation of SUCCESSION-PACKETs and SHARD-BUNDLEs for use
   in degraded conditions.  Operators SHOULD NOT wait for
   degraded conditions to configure the trust layer.

8.2.  Degraded Operations (intermittent connectivity)

   In degraded operations, Class A channels are intermittently
   available.  L3 DTN store-and-forward provides continuity.
   FDS encoding is OPTIONAL on Class A channels but SHOULD be
   used on Class B and C channels that supplement degraded
   Class A connectivity.  L5 Meridian DNS failover activates
   for unreachable origins.

8.3.  Disrupted Operations (DTN-only, no IP)

   In disrupted operations, IP connectivity is unavailable.
   L3 DTN operates over Class B, C, and D channels via
   DTN-BUNDLE-FDS.  L4 key distribution operates via
   SHARD-BUNDLE over available channels.  L5 Meridian operates
   via cached manifests; DNS is unavailable and failover is
   determined by MIRROR-ATTESTATION.

   This scenario corresponds to the operational environment
   of the Aeolian Layer [AEOLIAN] during the period described
   in the reference operational document [FIELDNOTE9].

8.4.  Post-Disruption Recovery (human relay, physical media)

   In post-disruption recovery, Class D channels (human relay)
   and physical media are the primary transport.  All messages
   are encoded in FDS and carried by human operators.  Key
   material is recovered from physical archives via SHARD-BUNDLE.
   Manifests are distributed via physical courier.

   Recovery operations SHOULD prioritise re-establishment of
   Class C channels (Morse, optical) before Class B channels,
   and Class B channels before Class A, to enable progressive
   capacity restoration.

8.5.  Air-Gapped Environments

   In air-gapped environments, the stack operates without any
   external network connectivity.  Physical media (USB, printed
   page, physical archive) are the only transport.  FDS encoding
   enables content to be carried on printed media and verified
   by humans.  SHARD-BUNDLE enables key distribution without
   electronic channels.

   The sovereign computing demonstration [SOVEREIGN] constitutes
   an air-gapped deployment of layers L2 through L5, with physical
   media as the L1 channel for initial key and content
   distribution.

8.6.  Extreme Latency: Physical Archival

   A physical archive (Section 7.3) instantiates the stack with
   a delivery latency of years to decades.  The archive is a
   DTN node with a very long custodial time-to-live.  The
   recovering party is a Class D human relay.

   This scenario is not hypothetical.  Physical archives have
   successfully preserved information across centuries.  The
   contribution of this document is to specify the framing and
   encoding that allows a physical archive to be a legible,
   verifiable, and recoverable node in a modern communications
   stack.


9.  Security Considerations

   The stack separates error detection, authenticity, and
   confidentiality; each MUST be considered independently.  FDS
   encoding provides error detection only.  Ed25519 signatures
   provide authenticity.  Confidentiality requires an additional
   encryption layer and is outside the scope of this document.

9.1.  Channel-Specific Threats

   Class B and C channels are subject to interception and
   modification.  FDS encoding does not provide confidentiality.
   Operators SHOULD apply encryption at L4 (via GPG or equivalent)
   before FDS encoding when confidentiality is required.

   Human relay channels (Class D) introduce additional trust
   assumptions.  Relaying humans may intentionally or
   unintentionally modify messages.  Ed25519 authentication
   (Section 4.4) SHOULD be used for all messages carried by
   human relays.

9.2.  Key Management at Reduced Capability

   In degraded and disrupted operations, key management
   capabilities may be reduced.  Key rotation, revocation,
   and distribution may be delayed.  Operators SHOULD pre-
   distribute SHARD-BUNDLEs during normal operations so that
   key recovery is possible under degraded conditions.

   The physical key custody mechanism (Section 6.4) is
   specifically designed for environments where electronic
   key management is unavailable.

9.3.  Human-Relay Trust

   Human relays are trusted to transmit messages accurately but
   are not trusted to verify message content or assert sender
   identity.  Authentication of messages carried via human relay
   depends entirely on the originating node's Ed25519 signature.

   Operators SHOULD educate human relay operators on the
   importance of accurate transcription and the meaning of
   FDS-FRAME integrity check failures.

9.4.  Replay and Sequencing

   FDS-FRAME does not include sequence numbers or replay
   protection.  L3 DTN bundle sequencing (per RFC 9171) provides
   ordering and duplicate detection for bundles.  Point-to-point
   FDS use without L3 is susceptible to replay.  Operators SHOULD
   include timestamps in message content when replay is a concern.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This document requests no actions from IANA.

   The FDS encoding format, SHARD-BUNDLE structure, and
   MIRROR-ATTESTATION format are informally specified in this
   document.  If the stack progresses to Proposed Standard,
   IANA registration of media types for FDS-FRAME and
   SHARD-BUNDLE will be requested at that time.


11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in
              RFC 2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, May 2017.

   [RFC4838]  Cerf, V., Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L.,
              Durst, R., Scott, K., Fall, K., and H. Weiss,
              "Delay-Tolerant Networking Architecture", RFC 4838,
              April 2007.

   [RFC9171]  Burleigh, S., Fall, K., and E. Birrane,
              "Bundle Protocol Version 7", RFC 9171,
              January 2022.

   [RFC8032]  Josefsson, S. and I. Liusvaara, "Edwards-Curve
              Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)", RFC 8032,
              January 2017.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64
              Data Encodings", RFC 4648, October 2006.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D.,
              and S. Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and
              Requirements", RFC 4033, March 2005.

   [ISO3309]  ISO/IEC 3309:1993, "Information technology --
              Telecommunications and information exchange between
              systems -- High-level data link control (HDLC)
              procedures -- Frame structure."

   [UAX15]    Davis, M. and K. Whistler, "Unicode Normalization
              Forms", Unicode Standard Annex #15,
              https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr15/

11.2.  Informative References

   [RFC5050]  Scott, K. and S. Burleigh, "Bundle Protocol
              Specification", RFC 5050, November 2007.

   [RFC5326]  Ramadas, M., Burleigh, S., and S. Farrell,
              "Licklider Transmission Protocol - Specification",
              RFC 5326, September 2008.

   [RFC8615]  Nottingham, M., "Well-Known Uniform Resource
              Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 8615, May 2019.

   [RFC8030]  Thomson, M., Damaggio, E., and B. Raymor,
              "Generic Event Delivery Using HTTP Push",
              RFC 8030, December 2016.

   [SHAMIR]   Shamir, A., "How to Share a Secret",
              Communications of the ACM, 22(11):612-613,
              November 1979.

   [MERIDIAN] Darley, T., "The Meridian Protocol",
              draft-darley-meridian-protocol-01,
              March 2026.

   [AEOLIAN]  Darley, T., "Windborne Continuity Infrastructure:
              Architecture and Protocol Considerations for
              Kite-Borne Delay-Tolerant Mesh Networks in
              Post-Disruption Environments",
              draft-darley-aeolian-dtn-arch-00, work in
              progress.

   [FDS]      Darley, T., "Fox Decimal Script (FDS): A
              Human-Legible Unicode Encoding for Degraded-Channel
              Transmission", draft-darley-fds-00, work in progress.

   [SHARD]    Darley, T., "SHARD-BUNDLE and MIRROR-ATTESTATION:
              Threshold Trust Primitives for the Resilient Signal
              Stack", draft-darley-shard-bundle-00, work in progress.

   [FIELDNOTE9]
              Darley, T., "Field Note #9: Dispatch from the
              Aeolian Layer", Proper Tools Field Notes, 2026.

   [UCSDEC]   Darley, T., "ucs_dec_tool.py -- Fox Decimal
              Script encoder/decoder", MIT License, 2026.
              https://github.com/propertools/ucs-dec

   [CREDMGR]  Darley, T., "credmgr -- Securely manage
              privileged account credentials via Shamir
              secret sharing", Apache License 2.0, 2012.
              https://github.com/treyka/credmgr

   [SLB]      Darley, T., "Second Law Blues",
              encoded as artifact SI-2084-FP-001, 2026.

   [ARCHIVE-PROTOCOL]
              Darley, T., "Vesper Archive Protocol v1.0",
              Proper Tools SRL, 2026.

   [SOVEREIGN] Darley, T., "Sovereign Computing: A Bill of
              Materials", Proper Tools SRL, 2026.

   [BUSH1945] Bush, V., "As We May Think",
              The Atlantic Monthly, July 1945.

   [NELSON]   Nelson, T.H., "Complex information processing:
              a file structure for the complex, the changing
              and the indeterminate", Proceedings of the 1965
              20th national conference, ACM, 1965.


12.  Acknowledgements

   The author thanks Vint Cerf, whose RFC 4838 was designed for
   a world he hoped would never exist, and who demonstrated that
   the correct response to this situation is to publish the
   protocol anyway.

   The author thanks the FIRST Time Security SIG and FIRST
   Standards SIG for the intellectual environment in which this
   work developed.

   The author thanks the operators of the Aeolian Layer ground
   stations, living and otherwise.

   This document was written in Brussels, near the Forêt de
   Soignes, in the spring of 2026.


13.  Author's Address

   Trey Darley
   Proper Tools SRL
   Brussels, Belgium

   Email: trey@propertools.be
   URI:   https://propertools.be
